please welcome to the stage Daniela
Narco head of strategic sales emia at
canva and Jorge bestard head of emia SNS
at canva hi everyone uh my name is
horard and I'm the head of sales and
success here at Kaa good morning
everyone and I am danela niako strategic
sales lead So today we're going to be
talking about uh the concept of the plg
Trap so this is a journey that K has
gone through we've observed some
companies that have started in doing plg
as similar to us and how they've fallen
into what Oliver J calls the plg Trap
our goal is that you take with you a ton
of insights some strategies and that you
learn how to navigate these
challenges but first let's try to
identify why companies fall for a plg
trap right and also why it's so
attractive so I think it's fair to say
that most um organizations that use the
plg uh Playbook they either focus on b2c
right or they're very much focusing on
um end user acquisition and it makes a
lot of sense because if we go back a few
years and when the plg Playbook uh was
launched in the market the industry went
crazy right everybody loved it we had a
lot of success stories a lot of
businesses that actually uh were able to
demonstrate how how much they increased
their adoption rate through um a plg so
obviously there was a lot of noise and
it was very exciting right and it is a
very power powerful tool because what it
allows is it allows an organization to
actually offer value to a customer
without them needing to purchase the
license first right so usually there's
also a premium model attached to it
which then again creates a lot of
loyalty it also creates um a lot of
trust and on the other side also it
increases your adoption rate in a very
fast way way sorry so companies that
want to scale right the plg motion is
absolutely the right way to go because
you have a product that sells itself and
also it's a self-service model and on
the other side it also has a good and
positive impact on your retention rate
so overall I would say the essence of a
plg motion very much is simplicity so
you focus on a product you build a
product that everybody loves right and
you make it indispensable to an end user
but the question is as you try to move
out of that trap almost how do you
encourage widespread usch across a
company so across teams across locations
right and across functions so what you
need to do is you need to identify
essentially a champion internally right
ideally you have a use case or um a
business case and then you use those
insights to actually Target corporate
buyers within that
organization so that could be
procurement for example it could be it
and that's when you start talking about
the consolidation and move away um from
that end user approach and actually
offer additional value to those end
users yeah and that's how you get
widespread uh company
adoption so I want you to think of it
this way each step into the plg journey
makes very logical sense and that's why
in a way it is a trap so remember the
first step you build a great product the
end users love it you get you get
Traction in the market so you raise you
raise a little round to build a
marketing team in a sales team you build
that marketing team in sales team all of
a sudden you see that hockey stick you
continue to rise you're deeper into the
Trap and then you want to double down on
your growth you you're doubling year on
year and you say okay so our next step
in our journey is to continue that
growth so The Logical next step is to
build an Enterprise team so you Double
Down On hiring salespeople that are very
expensive that have Enterprise
experience marketing team that is very
expensive uh they have Mark they need
Enterprise experience as well and all of
a sudden you are stuck in a trap because
you realize that large Enterprise
require things that are so far away from
your product team's grasp that you are
stuck on a 2 threeyear journey to build
that to Market all right what cios
require what has a procurement require
to go wall to- wall is very different
than what small teams require and they
make decisions in a very different
way so the symptoms of the plg Trap
generally you see that hockey stick
effect and then your growth really
stagnates you have a lot of difficulty
going up markets and you require it
because you've told your shareholders
hey we're going to take over the
Enterprise right and then there's a big
disconnect between what the product
delivers and what procurement teams and
it teams are telling you now the to go a
little bit deeper into the what we've
observed in the market is actually that
plg companies they do experience that
huge growth that hockey stick effect
with small and medium businesses however
they struggle to go beyond the 5 billion
valuation so think about companies that
are in the market right now that started
as as plg company think about Asana or
Evernote or Dropbox or these kinds of
companies they've all had a very hard
time breaking through that uh 5 billion
evaluation once they went to market now
the difficulty in going up Market as
well is that all of a sudden your cost
of Equis just increases so the growth
that you're doing earlier that 30 40% %
year on-year growth that you were doing
at certain unit economics that
completely shifts once you need a a
legal team that serves curement teams
once you need a product team that builds
for the Enterprise they actually found
that plg companies are 10 to 15% less
profitable than their sales Le
counterparts and to finish off the
disconnect between the capabilities and
the demands of these teams mean that the
journey is extended so we're in Europe
one thing that I'm sure everybody's
faced when dealing with procurement
teams for forun 500 companies data
residency we need sock 2 we need uh a
certain MSA that that a lot of times
when you're going into the Enterprise
for the first time you're faced with and
you're like oh I actually have to
prepare all this and it's not something
that you turn on like this right so to
break through the um 5 billion Val
valuation barrier companies really need
to make a shift right and shift needs to
happen at the right time so they no
longer can let with a product Le
strategy but maybe perhaps they need to
lean to more towards um traditional
methods right so let's say going back to
sales so the product alone no longer
sales itself we need additional input
having a pre-sales team having a post
sales team and it's very important also
to understand that this isn't easy right
it's not just like flipping the switch
and from one day to another you escape
the Trap but it takes a lot of um um
Collective effort as a business right
you need to build out the road map
essentially and then you execute on a
go-to market strategy but one thing that
we have seen is that companies that have
not been able to make that shift at the
right time they stay stagnant and once
they're stagnant it's extremely
difficult to get out of out of that
place so let's look at a couple of
examples so we have here Dropbox and
slack which I'm sure you all know or
some of you might even use and they have
one thing in common they Ed their
product to drive user adoption right so
within a very short period of time they
had hundreds and and thousands and
millions of users within their platform
but as they scaled they all had a couple
of challenges right so Dropbox for
example they started off with their
premium product again within a short
period of time they managed to get
millions of users we all know it we used
it during our uni times school workor
right it's a very it was always a
favorite tool for many but then actually
as they were trying to bridge into
Enterprise they realized hey we have an
offering that's only focused on the
product but they are missing Advanced
security controls for example right
admin controls for things that companies
really need in order to operate in in an
effective way likewise and then on the
other side of course we have box which
only focused on Enterprise so actually
what Dropbox has seen is they saw a
decrease in their um year-over-year
growth falling from 25% all the way down
to 8% in a very short period of time and
if you look at SL
so slack very similar use case here
their goto to Market strategy was it's
very easy to use it was um catered
towards small teams it's all around
productivity and collaboration as we
know right and then what happened 2020
Co hit so all of a sudden there was a
huge demand for such tools right and the
question was were they ready so they
actually had to build in an additional
comprehensive Suite of Enterprise kits
right which I think in their case was
Enterprise price grid which allowed them
to have um which allowed users to have
multiple workspaces and then of course
we also know what happened there teams
later came in and focused on Enterprise
only
right so we're going to talk a little
bit about Cana and our journey is still
being ridden as as you saw in Jason's
talk we are still growing quite a bit
but we are going through through a
certain Journey but our journey
definitely started in the consumer side
of things so we started targeting
individual users and small
businesses and as a tool we became very
popular just created a huge ground swell
we have uh 185 million monthly active
users and that was that was a great
place to start fishing for Enterprise
clients now what we discovered after
almost 10 years in the consumer space is
that as we started to dabble into the
large ENT Enterprise space we were
slowly digging ourselves into the plg
Trap
the exact same symptoms we had staggered
growth in the Enterprise our Enterprise
features were not ready for for what our
Enterprise customers were asking so we
almost had a we had a heart to heart
with ourselves and we said we have a a
product that is great for teams we don't
have a product that is great for
Enterprises yet so we we really pulled
on the brakes and we said okay let's
let's focus on doubling down on teams
and let's create almost a separate kind
of company let's separate the product
team the marketing team the Sal team and
let's give ourselves a leeway of two
years to build a pure Enterprise
product exactly so we also had to go
back to the drawing board essentially
right because we were focused on b2c
First and as we we try to understand
what does Enterprise look like for us
what do we need to do what's missing
essentially we had a great product that
was selling itself but all of a sudden
it was a little bit stagnant so we also
went back and looked into collaboration
tool so maybe perhaps shift away from
just a tradition social media tool and
going into a productivity tool so
collaboration admin controls
organizational hierarchy so that
companies can really mimic their
business structure within cber so the
process involved four main pillars and
one aspect that was really important was
really to understand the market demands
and also Trends right so we took big
bets straight away very early on we were
one of the adapters of AI in the tool
and also we looked looked um we pulled
in additional features right that were
really dedicated to Enterprise users
such as whiteboards presentations
recording Etc and then we went and had a
lot of feedback and yeah like discussion
groups with our customers trying to
understand what is it that they need
from us what is it that the end user
need in order to deploy canva as an
Enterprise tool and then pull that back
into your um product road map and
continue to evolve your product so
that's what we did at canva so a couple
of weeks ago as part of our canva create
canva create event which is our product
release event we actually pushed out our
Enterprise product which showed that we
are committed to focus on Enterprise
only but also as you can see here we
have a slightly different messaging
right so it's shifted to work redesign
so that we also address the Right
audience and ultimately what happened is
it helped us to really close the loop so
now we are able to address a truly
diverse customer base right which we
have so we have the endtoend user we
have individual users so we that use Pro
paid users we have canva for teams which
is for smaller teams and we can now
cater to larger organizations as
well uh so how can companies really
predict and avoid and overcome the plg
Trap so we have a a three-prong strategy
that we'd love to share with you the
first of all is is really getting the
company uh mentally ready so
as as Oliver J he's one of our advisers
he's the ex C of auna he says if it
doesn't feel like you have two separate
companies you're doing it wrong it it
really has to feel like you're
separating your sales team you're
separating your product team and they
really have to feel that you are
building a whole separate section this
almost reminds me of of when Apple they
they started on their lease project
right they they completely separated
that project from the company that was
very profitable but not that computer so
we did the same thing and we we
separated and we started building in the
Enterprise but not only did we need to
have a different product development
team but our customer interactions had
to be different our goto Market
strategies had to be different and our
specialized Talent had to be different
um think of Finance uh when you are
selling into the Enterprise so you're
selling to a company like Unilever which
has hundreds of billing departments it's
very different from sending a bill to a
100% team then sending a bill to a
200,000 employee company so your Finance
team that is very focused on teams and
users all of a sudden they're going to
be focusing on how to build their
structures for a u Enterprise product
think about legal as well so we talked
about msas and negotiating with
procurement teams of 50 to 100 people if
your legal team is very used to just
very light msas for small teams versus
negotiating with the Fortune 500 you
need a completely separate legal team
and security data residency when do you
kick off that Journey right getting your
sock Juan sock 2 certifications so all
that is is a journey and you have to
communicate that Journey when you
started right you have to communicate
with your employees you have to
communicate it with your partners uh but
we took it one step further and we
communicated with our customers uh a lot
of our customers that were telling us
hey we're thinking about going well to
wall we told them at uh two years ago
hey we're not we're not ready yet uh
we're not able to support you yet but
let's support different teams and when
we are ready we're going to let you
know right and then as a second strategy
what we put into place was early and
continuous product
adaptation so an organization with 500
users a th000 users 5,000 users or
10,000 users they have completely
different product requirements and they
also have completely different service
requirements they have expectations on
how to work with a vendor so what we did
was we focused very much on the user
experience so we went away from we went
away from the product let growth alone
and really focused on the user
experience for smaller teams for larger
teams and then what happens is that your
product needs to continue to mature as
well right so on our side what we did
was we looked into the feedback that our
customers have provided and some of the
main requirements they had were actually
single sign on which we all know is a
very basic requirement right but for us
it was a shift and also data encryptions
and compliance standards but when it
comes to adaptation around AI for
example it's still fairly new so a lot
of customers they have a high appetite
for AI others they're still a bit weary
right and they feel a bit overwhelmed so
being able to respond to both sides
giving them the opportunity to play with
these tools but also giving them the
assurance that they have control so we
have both we have ai but we also have
control controls in place so that they
can slowly EAS themselves into the
product and then on top of that we also
focus on specific teams and we offer
them different functionalities right a
HR team they have different requirements
Finance design teams or marketing teams
so we have a dedicated work Suite that
caters to all of
them and to finish off to start our
evolving sales and marketing strategy so
what we did is we got together as as a
go-to market team and we said we have
part of the team that is very used to
selling to users and smaller teams and
we hired a a set of Enterprise sellers
that were very used to selling the
Enterprise so think of this as a two-
pring strategy right as a company starts
adding users there's team Sellers and
then there's Enterprise uh that are able
to sell to to to sea level Executives
the target markets that you have in the
Enterprise are very different from the
target markets that you might have in
teams right there's even the sales
territories there's countries that are
very and mid-market heavy and there's
countries that that are very Enterprise
heavy and then the the pricing we
actually did an audit with an external
company to really audit our pricing and
see if the pricing is ready for the
Enterprise and we completely shifted our
pricing we lowered our pricing on the
team side and because all the features
that we had on the Enterprise uh brought
a lot more value we raised the price on
the Enterprise side and then we tried to
align the sales and marketing
communication as much as possible this
is it's actually something that
companies have a challenging time
because at the end of the day you do
want to Market to users but you also
want to Market to the sea levels right
think about how you adjust your message
in a different way the value for a user
is very different than a value for an a
head of it or a CA level who is never
going to use your product but they need
to know how it's going to influence
their business there's two examples here
which is a message that we how we Market
to individual users you can see it's
very Fe feature driven hey with you have
you can create stuning designs you have
unlimited access to premium content a
CIO does not care about that what he
cares about is how are you going to
streamline my workflows how does canva
live within the ecosystem of apps that I
have and how are you going to make or or
help me save money for my company so
very two-pronged approach
here and we also focus a lot on the post
sales side so we have a dedicated
customer success team at canva because
for us at very important that customers
understand the maximum value they get
out of the product very early on so we
actually taking a forward-looking
approach where our team sets up
dedicated sessions um with clients and
they try to understand their goals and
their objectives for the next 12 to 24
months right it also allows us to spot
risks very early on and also identify
Trends because it's almost it's like a
feedback where the customer then goes to
our CS team goes to sales and then sales
takes it to product and then product
takes it to customer service and so on
so this is how we all work together
that's why pre-sales and post sales they
need to work they need to align and work
together and we also work with Champions
internal Champions it's really important
that you identify them because you can
use a train the trainer approach right
those Champions can help you with the
adoption rate they can go out sell to
different functions different regions on
your behalf it really helped us also to
build a lot of trust and loyalty with
those
customers so in the end it's all a
balancing act right as you can see plg
is a powerful tool but it's about
balancing the strength of a plg strategy
and a demand of Enterprise
customers so we have taken you through a
lot of different points today but just
to summarize it it's really important to
get a company mentally ready it's almost
like you have two different companies
acting Under One Roof right they have
different requirements and it's
important to
communicate as early as possible and
also to be transparent with your team
address challenges that might arise
because it does take Collective effort
and then also don't forget your product
adaptation being able to respond to
Trends as early as possible speaking to
your customers speaking to your SCS team
and then ensuring that your product
matures with your customer base because
at this point it will be very diverse
and then you go layer deeper which is
addressing your sales and marketing
strategies and you go to Market
strategies right refining your messaging
and your
positioning so that you can Target the
Right
audience so thank you for your time any
questions